Okay, I've been referring to
the class member variables as properties.
Kotlin classes can only have properties.
They don't have fields.
You can use the same access modifiers
with properties as you can with classes
and remember that the default is public.
That's why we've been able to directly access the first name
and full-time properties from the main function.
You can see up here we're just directly accessing them.
And as you've seen, we're just using the dot notation
to access the public properties,
meaning that we've followed the instance name
with a period or dot and then the property name.
Now, let's change the visibility of
the full-time property and see what error we get.
So, we'll go down to our class
and we're going to make the full-time property private.
And we're gonna get errors and it says
"cannot access full time, it is private and employee."
So, let's remove that.
I just want to show you that we can
no longer use the dot notation.
But as you saw, the access modifier
goes before the declaration.
So, what exactly is happening when
we're using the dot notation here
to access a public property?
Well, when we declare a property
either using the primary constructor or explicitly,
Kotlin creates default accessors for us,
also known as getters and setters.
Now, in Java, we'd have to do the following:
let's go back to our Java code
and we'll use IntelliJ's generate code feature
to generate setters and getters for the fields,
so we'll right-click, say generate.
We want getter and setter.
I'm going to select both of these by holding the CTRL key
when I click on the second one
and then we'll click OK and now we have gets
and I guess I didn't ask it to do sets, I thought I did.
Oh, it's because they're final.
That's why it won't let us do it.
Well, we don't want the full-time property to be final.
We actually declared that as a var, so let's remove that
and then we'll have IntelliJ generate us the setter for this
and it's only offering us the boolean because
the first name property, or field rather, is final.
Okay, so now we have our sets and our get for our fields.
So, this is quite a bit of code in the Java class
and all we're doing in this class is
declaring the fields, you know, having two constructors,
and setters and getters.
That's it.
So, let's go back to Kotlin.
In Kotlin, of course, we get
all of that for free, for public properties.
A default setter and getter is generated for them.
Of course, as in Java, because this is a vowel,
you're not going to be able to set the value again,
but we can change the full-time value,
so let's do that for John.
Let's make him part-time. Right now he's full-time.
So we can use the dot notation again.
We can just say m dot
and you can see we're offered both
so we'll say full-time equals false.
So if we run now and, in fact we're not printing
the full-time value for John so I'll do that,
m dot full-time.
So if we run ...
we'll see that the value is false for John.
So for public properties in Kotlin you get
the getters and the setters when things aren't
declared as val for free.
Now you'll notice that if we try to do this,
amp dot first name equals mike,
you'll see that you can't do it
because val can't be reassigned.
So there was no setter generated for that property
just as we couldn't generate one in Java over here.
So what about private properties?
For public properties you can just use the dot notation
and I have to stress that under the covers
this is calling the getter and setter.
But what about private properties?
What if we wanna set and get the full-time status?
What if we wanna make full-time private?
Okay, so now we're getting errors here.
Can we call a get method?
Is there a get full-time method here?
Well there isn't, there's nothing.
And there's no set either so what do we do?
Okay this is where you have to think
a little differently than you do in Java.
Okay in Java, when the field is declared private
and in fact these fields are declared private
we can still get inside the values
if there is a public getter and setter available.
But in Kotlin if we declare the property private
there will be no way to modify
that property from the outside even using a setter,
and that's because the rule in Kotlin is that
getters and setters have to have
the same visibiility as the property
or a less permissive visibility.
So in this case, the getter and setter
for full-time are going to be private
because the getter and setter has to have
the same visibility as the property.
So what does this mean?
Well if you want to allow a property
to be modified from outside the class
you can't declare it private because
the setter and getter will also have to be private.
Now think about this for a minute.
As I said in Java when you have a private field
and you wanna allow the field to be changed from the outside
you provide public getters and setters.
And you do that so that those from the outside
can change the value of the field
directly through the setter.
Now with Kotlin properties those,
nothing from the outside can ever
change the property directly.
It always has to go through the getter and setter.
In Java that's not true.
If we were to declare these public
then members on the outside can directly change
the values of the fields just by using
Java employee dot, they don't have to do anything else.
But in Kotlin it looks like we're using
just going amp three dot first name
but in fact this is generating a call
to the set under the covers.
So it's perfectly okay to have public properties in Kotlin.
Members from outside won't be able
to directly change the value of the property.
So there's really no point in declaring a property private
unless you really just wanna use it inside the class
and you never ever want it changed from outside.
So unlike Java, in Kotlin you don't have to
declare a property private to prevent it
from being directly modified.
So in this case, because we want the main function
to be able to modify the full-time property
we can't declare it as private
because the moment we do it's not
accessible at all from the outside.
So what we originally had which was public was fine.
Now there will be times when you want to
do more than just assign and return the property value
when someone calls a getter or a setter
so the auto-generated accessors won't be sufficient
because the auto-generated accessors basically just do this.
You know, the getter will just return
the value of the property and the setter
will just set the property with whatever value you passed.
So if the auto-generated accessors
won't serve your needs, you can write your own.
But when you write your own, you have to declare
the property within the class.
So the moment you need your own setter or getter
you can't declare the property
as part of a primary constructor.
You have to explicitly declare
the property inside the class.
So let's write a custom get for the full-time property
so you can see how it's done.
So first we have to remove the declaration
from the primary constructor.
So all we have to do is remove var
because the moment we do, this is no longer a declaration.
It's just a parameter.
So that means that Kotlin is not going to
generate the code that's going to
declare the property for us inside the class.
We're gonna have to do that ourselves now.
So let's go ahead and do that.
Var full-time ...
well we don't actually have to
put the type there, we can just say
full-time, the compiler can infer the type
from this parameter up here.
Now at this point the compiler will
generate the default setter and getter for us
so even though we're not declaring the property
as part of the primary constructor,
we still get the setter and getter for free.
But we wanna do more than just return
the value when get is called.
Let's say we also wanna print the value,
obviously this is a silly example but
it'll let me demonstrate how to create a custom getter.
So when you want a custom accessor
it has to come immediately after the property declaration.
So you can't have a bunch of stuff here
and then start writing your setters and getters.
If you want the custom set or custom get
you have to write them immediately after
the property declaration.
Now I said not too long ago that Kotlin classes
only have properties, they don't have fields.
But if you have accessors for the fields
either the ones generated for you by Kotlin
or custom ones then there will be
a backing field associated with the property.
And you have to refer to that backing field
when you write a custom setter or getter
you can't return or set the value of the property directly.
However, note that if you don't
need to set or get the property value
in a custom accessor then the backing field
won't be generated.
So for example you might have a custom get
that doesn't rely on the value of the property.
It might calculate the value that
it's going to return on the fly.
So if you don't reference the property in the get,
then in that case the backing field won't be generated.
But in our case, we do need the backing field
because we are going to refer to
the value of full-time and the way to refer
to the backing field is to use the field identifier.
Now custom accessors are the only situation
in which we can use the field identifiers
so let's see how that looks, we'll add our custom get.
So we'll say get...
and we're going to print something out like I said,
kind of silly running the custom get
and then we'll just return the value of the property
but we have to do it by referencing the backing field
using the field identifier.
So this is the only place that we can
access the backing field directly
and we refer to it using the identifier field.
Okay so there were a few times up here
where we're actually getting the full-time
and when we do this, this is now going
to call our custom get.
So let's run, and we should see
running the custom get printed
every time we get the value now.
And you'll see that we do, every time we
go to get the value of full-time we see
running the custom get and then the value is returned.
Now of course we can do the same thing with set.
Our implementations are trivial
but they demonstrate how to write
custom getters and setters.
So let's write our custom set
and it starts off with set and this time
you want to accept a value and then we'll
do the same thing we did before,
we'll just say running the custom set
and now we'll set the property
and we do this once again by referring to the field
and we say field equals value.
So what we're doing here is doing the silly print
and then we're assigning the property,
the backing field for the property,
with the value that was passed to the set.
So let's run.
And now we just see this once
because the only time that we're actually setting
the full-time field is here for John.
So we don't see the custom print line
printed for Joe and Jane,
but we do for John.
Now maybe you expected it to be called three times,
but of course for Joe and Jane
the only time we're setting it
is when we call the constructor
and the constructor doesn't use
the second get to set the values.
So if you wanted to do more when
the instance is constructed rather than
just set the property values as we saw earlier,
for that you would use an init block.
Okay that's it for properties and
the backing field and setters and getters.
I'm gonna stop the video now and we'll
continue our discussion of classes in the next video.